---
layout: page
title: Course Projects 
permalink: /teaching/topics-in-rl-projects
---

There are two kinds of course projects: research projects and non-research projects.
The primary goal of a non-research project is to reproduce the proof of a theoretical RL paper in order to better understand it.
The primary goal of a research project is to investigate a novel research idea and ideally make a submission to some venues (e.g., ICML).
In either case,
you are expected to write a proposal (10%), submit a final writeup (50%), and deliver a project presentation (20%).
There is no difference regrading grades between the two types of projects.  

Both the proposal and the final writeup are expected to be PDF files generated by LaTeX. You can use, e.g., [OverLeaf](https://www.overleaf.com).

## Non-research project
I will provide a list of papers for you to choose from. You are also welcome to choose a paper not from the list but make sure to talk with me first for approval.
You must complete the non-research project **solo**.

* Proposal: you need to state what paper you choose to reproduce and give a tentative timeline for milestones (e.g., understanding the motivation, understanding the background, finishing Lemma 1, finishing Theorem 1, and finishing the writeup)
* Writeup: 
  - The writeup is expected to be self-contained, i.e., a reader should be able to understand the writeup without referring to the original paper. To achieve this with minimal effort, the writeup should include the mathematical formulation of the problem the paper studies.
  Of course, you need to care only the math part of the paper and feel free to ignore the introduction, related work, and experiments in the writeup. 
  But in most cases you do need to understand the non-math part well to better understand the math part.
  - The writeup must be **in your own words**. In the writeup, you should try to make the equations as clear as possible. You should understand every equation you write and fix ambiguous arguments in the original paper (e.g., "it is easy to see", "it is trivial that"). A reader from a CS department that has only undergraduate level probability and linear algebra knowledge should be able to understand the equations in your writeup. Annotate your equations well, e.g., if one inequality results from Cauchy–Schwarz or the extreme value theorem,
  you should spell it out.
  - Try to use the notations I use in the lectures. Make sure every notation you use is clearly defined in the writeup. Feel free to reorganize the original paper.
  - You are welcome to include some extensions of the existing results. Even very small extensions matter. Of course, extensions are just for bonus and are not necessary.
* Presentation: walk me and other students through your writeup. I might ask questions regarding the equations in your writeup. The length of the presentation will be determined later based on the size of the class.

## Research project
I will provide a list of ideas for you to choose from. Each idea consists of one or two papers (referred to as the base paper) and some possible directions for extensions. You are expected to understand the base papers and investigate the extension.
**If an idea consists of N base papers, then a group of N can work on it.** 
Usually we have N = 2.
I have only limited number of ideas so it is on a **first-come-first-served** basis (I will discuss the details later). I will try my best but there is no guarantee that everyone can find a research project. 

Each group only needs to submit one proposal, one writeup, and do one presentation.
* Proposal: you need to state what idea you choose to investigate and the job assignment in your group (if you work on a group).
You should give a tentative timeline for milestones (e.g., understanding the base papers, investigating the extensions, finishing the writeup)
* Writeup: The writeup is meant to be a paper that is ready for submission to some venues (e.g., TMLR, ICML). So it should have abstract, introduction, background, related work, new findings, conclusion, and references. Refer to the base paper to get an idea on what a research paper looks like.
* Presentation: walk me and other students through your paper. I might ask some questions.

In case the extension does not work, one research project can be transformed into **N** non-research projects since it has N base papers. So the research project is risk free in that you will anyway have a successful project for this course. Please document the efforts you make and why the extension failed in the writeup of such non-research projects. Those efforts matter a lot during my evaluation. Though the research projects are risk free, please **take them seriously and start early**. It is nontrivial to find ideas that are good enough, easy enough, and promising enough to fit into a course research project.